CHAPTER 1
INTRODUCTION

A MUDA is a mechanism in which multiple sellers submit asks and multiple buyers submit bids to trade multiple units of a homogeneous good at a single uniform clearing price (when trades occur) [10], [20]. During the process of order submission, multiple sellers specify the quantities of goods they offer and their minimum acceptable prices, while multiple buyers specify the quantities of goods they require and their maximum acceptable prices. As illustrated in Figure 1.1, a trade becomes feasible when a buyer’s bid price meets or exceeds a seller’s ask price. Then, the MUDA protocol determines which buyers and sellers participate in trades, how many units are transferred, and the price per trade [10], [20]. 

MUDA mechanisms are used in stock markets, treasury auctions, energy markets, and cloud resource allocation systems [2], [8], [9], [12].

As illustrated in Figure 1.2, MUDA is positioned among other typical auction models. A single-unit auction engages multiple buyers purchasing from a single seller. A double auction engages multiple buyers and multiple sellers purchasing a single unit. In a continuous double auction, orders are submitted and matched over a period as the market changes. However, for MUDA, the process takes place in a batch execution, whereby multiple buyers and multiple sellers place their bids and asks simultaneously. Each of these agents can sell and buy multiple units at a single unit price.

For this reason, MUDA is defined as a finite sequence of state transitions. A (deterministic) state-transition system (STS) is given by a set of states, an initial state, and a total transition function 

δ : State → State

that produces the next state from the current state. A finite execution is obtained by iterating δ, and the execution is extended to an infinite trace by stuttering in the terminal state.

In the mechanized model used in this thesis, MUDA is represented as a deterministic STS with an explicit phase component. Each protocol phase advances by one transition step. Matching may take multiple transition steps during the matching phase, while the clearing price is computed in a dedicated clearing-price phase. The resulting finite execution is extended to an infinite trace by stuttering in the terminal phase.

The economic properties of MUDA with uniform pricing, such as IR, IC, BB, and AE, are established in existing studies [10], [11], [12]. The properties are analyzed based on truthful bidding and trading results. However, there is no state-based execution model for MUDA presented in the literature. The literature does not present how to assign priority when there are multiple feasible trades at the same time, how to process residual quantities during trades, and what state-based condition is required for trades to occur for specific orders. The literature on the formal verification of MUDA is limited to single-unit auctions and continuous double auctions, which cannot be applied to batch auctioning with single price for all items in MUDA [6], [7], [17], [18], [19].

Classical logics such as first-order logic and Hoare logic evaluate formulae at a single state or over a single program state [22], [23], [24], [28], [29]. As a result, they do not express properties that must hold across an entire execution trace. LTL evaluates formulae along positions of a fixed trace and provides temporal operators that refer to future states on that trace [25], [26], [30]. This expressiveness is required to state persistence and eventuality conditions in auction executions. For example, priority fairness requires that the priority condition holds at every state of the execution trace. Therefore, temporal reasoning is necessary for formal verification of all three fairness properties.

This thesis addresses these gaps with the achievement of the following objectives. First, it formally specifies the operational semantics of MUDA as a deterministic STS with seven phases: submission, sorting, matching, clearing price, finalization, bookkeeping, and rejection. These phases are further divided into pre-match, settlement, and post-match stages, as shown in Figure A.3. Second, it formally specifies three fairness properties using Linear Temporal Logic (LTL) interpreted over MUDA execution traces. The mechanization defines LTL with the temporal operators X (next), F (eventually), and G (always), but the three fairness properties verified in this thesis are invariance properties and are stated using G only. These properties are Priority Fairness, Quantity Fairness, and Price Fairness. Third, it formally verifies the fairness properties using the Rocq [27] proof assistant. All the fairness properties are formally verified without admitted lemmas. This verification proves that for all inputs bs and as_list, the execution trace induced from initial_state bs as_list satisfies the fairness properties.

This thesis investigates three research questions:
How can MUDA execution be formalized as a deterministic STS?
Which temporal operator is sufficient to express all three fairness properties over MUDA execution traces?
Can all three fairness properties be verified using Rocq?

In this thesis, the MUDA protocol is formalized as a deterministic STS for single batch execution. Strategic behavior is not considered in the formalization. The MUDA protocol is batch-based; in other words, it examines all the bids and asks at the same time. The formal development considers the bids and asks as input data and focuses on the fairness of the resulting executions. The other auction properties related to strategic manipulation, collusion, or round-robin auction systems are not considered in this research. Future verification work may consider extending the results into nondeterministic models of auction systems.