CHAPTER 2
LITERATURE REVIEW

2.1 Related Work

Literature on MUDA has been conducted primarily on economic properties in stock markets, treasury auctions, energy trading markets, and cloud resource allocation systems [10], [11], [12], [20]. Other literature has addressed fairness-related notions, but these are not defined in terms of temporal properties over the execution of a protocol. The following discussion explains how existing results relate to MUDA across different properties.

2.1.1 Auction Economic Properties

The existing literature has emphasized the economic properties of MUDA, such as IR, IC, BB, and AE [10], [11], [12], [20]. This literature analyzes how truthful bidding takes place in the market, i.e., how buyers bid and how sellers ask under truthful bidding conditions. Another stream of literature has emphasized welfare, equilibrium, and incentive properties in different types of auction systems, such as double-sided auctions, treasury auctions, combinatorial markets, and repeated single-sided auctions [2], [9], [14]. The double-sided auction mechanism developed by McAfee has been quoted, but this mechanism has been applied to single-unit trade only.

2.1.2 Fairness Definitions in Auction Mechanisms

Each study has defined its own concept of fairness in auction mechanisms and has used a set of criteria that is related to the objective of the specific mechanism used in the auction.

A study by Bartolini and Cottarelli presents the concept of fairness held by the treasury with respect to the symmetry of information on the orders [2]. In this study, the concept of fairness was related to the symmetry of the information held by the groups that participated in the auction. In this study, the auction was single-sided, meaning that only one group of agents participated in the auction by placing the orders. Therefore, this concept of fairness is not related to the allocation of the items between the groups in the MUDA.

Murillo et al. proposed the concept of fairness held in the next rounds of the auction with respect to the symmetry of the distributions of the items [16]. Therefore, the concept of fairness was related to the distributions of the items. However, the auction held in the MUDA was double-sided and was held in one round. Therefore, the proposed concept of fairness is not related to the proposed auction mechanism.

The concept of fairness proposed by Liu et al. was related to the concept of the two-sided auction with budgets [14]. In this concept of fairness, the number of participants was related to the budgets of the participants. However, this was not related to the priority constraints, the constant price level, or the matching order constraints. Therefore, this concept of fairness was not related to the existing fairness held in the MUDA.

2.1.3 Auction Clearing Price Rules

The literature on the auction mechanism presents the use of two different clearing price rules for the MUDA, namely discriminatory pricing or uniform pricing [2], [8], [10], [11], [15].

In the analysis of the use of uniform pricing, Markakis and Telelis identify the stability conditions in which the trader cannot influence the prices [15]. In the same context, the use of MUDA with uniform pricing was identified by Huang et al. as the basis for the calculation of the assignment of prices using the negotiation scheme [10]. Although the focus was on the use of the negotiation scheme with the use of the clearing price, none of the above sources considered the issue of uniqueness of the value.

During MUDA execution, the clearing price rule should lie within the range defined by the marginal bid and marginal ask for feasibility. These are derived from the process of matching and should always be satisfied during execution.

2.1.4 Formal Verification of Trades and Auctions

There are interactive theorem proving approaches applied to auctions to achieve formal verification. However, existing work focuses on correctness properties of specific auction designs. To the best of our knowledge, there is no prior work that models a batch deterministic MUDA protocol as a state-transition system and verifies fairness properties over infinite execution traces.

Most of the MUDA literature studies outcome-based properties such as incentive compatibility, individual rationality, budget balance, and anonymity. These works describe the result of the auction in terms of allocations and payments. In contrast, this thesis introduces an execution model based on a deterministic state-transition system. In this model, fairness is treated as an execution-level property that must hold at every state along the execution trace.

In their work, Natarajan et al. use a Coq proof assistant for formal verification of double-sided call auctions for multi-unit orders. They have shown formal verification for optimal uniform match and maximum volume of trade using a Coq proof assistant [17]. In their earlier work, Sarswat and Singh have shown formal verification for fairness, uniformity, and individual rationality in single unit auctions. Match predicates have been formalized and correctness properties have been shown for specific final results of auctions [18], [19].

In their recent work on formal verification for auctions, Garg and Sarswat have specified continuous double auction rules in Coq proof assistants for showing correctness properties for order matching in auctions with price-time priority and partial fills for sequential order arrival [6].

Besides this, Garg et al. propose an automated checker for double auctions and establish uniqueness properties for verification of violations by comparing the output of the exchange and the verified specifications [7]. Further, this proposed checker is utilized for verifying the output of the final auctions, thus identifying possible inconsistencies in the output and the verified algorithms.

Among all the contributions, the execution of the auction is defined in the algorithms. The bids and asks are ranked according to the level of competitiveness, and the feasibility is measured by considering the comparisons between the bid and ask prices, and the trade sizes are computed according to the remaining sizes. The matching is performed until the termination conditions are satisfied. However, there is no formalization of MUDA as a deterministic batch multi-unit protocol that is suitable for temporal verification of the execution phase's fairness properties. Moreover, there is no formalization or verification of the fairness properties as temporal relationships between the execution traces. Thus, fairness properties of MUDA are not addressed as temporal relationships over execution traces in the verification studies conducted so far.